Title: Nile
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nile

The Nile is a major north-flowing river in northeast Africa which empties into the Mediterranean Sea. At 7,088 kilometers (4,404 mi) long, it is the longest river in the world, although the volume of water it carries is much smaller than other major rivers such as the Amazon or the Congo. The Nile has played a central role in the environmental, economic, and cultural history of Africa for millennia.
The Nile has two major tributaries: the White Nile and the Blue Nile. The White Nile is longer and is considered to be the headwaters, yet the Blue Nile contributes over twice the water volume of the White Nile. The White Nile begins near Lake Victoria and flows through Uganda and South Sudan, while the Blue Nile begins near Lake Tana in Ethiopia and flows into Sudan from the southeast. The two rivers meet at the Sudanese capital, Khartoum. From there, the Nile flows north through the Nubian Desert to Egypt's capital, Cairo, and finally empties into the Mediterranean Sea near Alexandria, where it has formed a large river delta.
Geologically, the Nile is a young river, having followed its present course for about 15,000 years. Its drainage basin extends across eleven countries. Most of the water in the Nile comes from rainfall in the upstream countries Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Downstream countries – Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan – are primarily desert and withdraw river water for irrigation. Other countries that lie wholly or partly in the Nile Basin are Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, and Rwanda.
The Nile was the foundation of the Ancient Egyptian civilization, which relied on the river for nearly every aspect of life. The annual flooding of the river deposited nutrient-rich silt along the riverbanks. This soil supported crops that enabled a sophisticated society to thrive in an otherwise inhospitable desert. The Nile facilitated trade, communication, transportation, and governance. South (upstream) of the second Nile cataract lay Nubia, the historical home of the ancient Kerma culture and the Kushite Empire. Many Europeans were fascinated by the Nile, and their explorations around Lake Victoria in the late 19th century located the source of the river. Among the cultures that live along the Nile in the modern era are the Nilotic peoples, semi-nomadic cattle herders who practice nomadic pastoralism, moving their cattle seasonally in response to the Nile's floods.
In the modern era, the Nile plays a critical role in the economies of Egypt and Sudan, which rely on it to irrigate extensive croplands. Since the late 20th century, over a dozen dams have been built in the Nile Basin to provide for irrigation and to generate electricity. The dams have altered the river's annual flood cycle and restricted the transport of silt downstream, causing the Nile Delta to shrink. Some dams – such as the Aswan High Dam and Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam – have been the source of international political disputes about water scarcity, safety, food security, and forced displacement of peoples.


== Names and etymology ==
The English word "Nile" is derived from the Latin Nilus and the Ancient Greek Νεῖλος (Neilos), which possibly originated from the Semitic term naḥal, meaning 'river'.

In the ancient Egyptian language, the same word was used for 'Nile' and 'river': jtrw. Egyptians called their country kmt meaning 'black', in reference to the dark color of the Nile floodwaters as they carried sediment from upriver. The English name "Blue Nile" is a translation of the Arabic name Al-Baḥr Al-Azraq.
In the modern era, the river goes by several names within the Nile Basin. In Egypt, it is referred to as Al-Nīl, Baḥr Al-Nīl or Nahr Al-Nīl. In South Sudan, it is sometimes referred to by the Arabic Baḥr el-Jebel, بحر الجبل, literally 'Mountain River'. In Uganda, the speakers of Luganda use the name Kiyira. Some Nubian peoples of Egypt and Sudan use the Nobiin name Áman Dawū ('Great Water').
Several tributaries (smaller rivers that merge into the Nile) and segments of the river incorporate "Nile" in their names, including the following:

Albert Nile – Segment of the White Nile flowing north from Lake Albert to Nimule
Black Nile – An alternate name for the Atbarah River
Blue Nile – One of the two major tributaries of the Nile
Kyoga Nile – Segment of the White Nile from Lake Kyoga to Lake Albert
Main Nile – Segment of the Nile downstream from the confluence of Blue Nile and White Nile
Mountain Nile – Segment of the White Nile from the mountains of Uganda to the plains of South Sudan
Victoria Nile – Segment of the White Nile from Lake Victoria to Lake Kyoga
White Nile – One of the two major tributaries of the Nile
Yellow Nile – The Wadi Howar, remnant of an ancient tributary that dried up several thousand years ago


== Sources ==

The source of the Nile is a tributary of the Rukarara River, in Nyungwe National Park, Rwanda, at 2°19′35″S 29°21′30″E, at an elevation of 2,539 meters (8,330 ft). The source is defined as the starting point of the longest year-round watercourse in the Nile's drainage basin. From this source, the river runs 7,088 kilometers (4,404 mi) to its mouth at the Mediterranean Sea. The distance was measured in 2009 along the centerline of the river using satellite imagery.
The highest sources of the Nile are on the slopes of the Rwenzori Mountains in Uganda. The legendary Mountains of the Moon, described by the Greek astronomer Ptolemy, have been associated with Rwenzori.
The southernmost source of the Nile is in Burundi at one of the heads of the Ruvyironza River, which feeds into the Kagera River. A monument was erected nearby in 1937 by Burkhart Waldecker close to the town of Rutovu, near Mount Kikizi.
Lake Victoria – shared by Tanzania, Uganda, and Kenya – is sometimes informally described as the source, because it feeds the White Nile from its outflow at Jinja, Uganda. However, some have suggested that the genuine source of the Nile is the rain clouds that are often found above Lake Victoria, because they contribute the vast majority of the lake's water.

The source of the Blue Nile tributary is near the town of Gish Abay, south of Lake Tana.


== Geography ==

The Nile is a major river in northeast Africa which flows into the Mediterranean Sea. The Nile Basin is all land that drains into the Nile, and it covers  2,927,843 km2 – about 10% of the African continent (see adjacent map).  Eleven countries are wholly or partially within the basin:  Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. The basin covers a wide variety of climates, ecosystems, and topographies – ranging from arid, sandy deserts in the north, to flat, swampy wetlands in the middle, to rainy, forested mountains in the south.
The basin can be divided into seven regions; five of these regions encompass the longest course of the Nile. Proceeding in a downstream sequence, these five regions are: the African Great Lakes, the Mountain Nile, the White Nile, the main Nile, and the Nile Delta. Two additional regions encompass major tributaries: the Blue Nile and the Atbarah River.


=== African Great Lakes ===