Title: Sharm El Sheikh
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharm_El_Sheikh

Sharm El Sheikh, alternatively rendered Sharm el-Sheikh or Charm el Sheikh, is an Egyptian city located on the southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula, in South Sinai Governorate, on the coastal strip along the Red Sea in Asia. Its population is approximately 77,000 as of 2017. Sharm El Sheikh is the administrative hub of Egypt's South Sinai Governorate, which includes the smaller coastal towns of Dahab and Nuweiba as well as the mountainous interior, St. Catherine and Mount Sinai. 
It was historically a fishing town and military base, and was developed into a commercial and tourist-centric city afterwards. The Egyptian government continued and expanded the development, promoting Sharm El Sheikh as a major international resort city. Today, the city and holiday resort is a significant centre for tourism in Egypt, while also attracting many international conferences, concerts, clubbing and diplomatic meetings.
Downtown Sharm El Sheikh has the major concentrations of international banks in the city and is home to several large national companies. The city is home to major hospitals and health facilities, including Sharm International Hospital, the city's largest hospital and others engaged in health-related care and research. Sharm El Sheikh port is the city's seaport, which lies on the coast of the Red Sea,   and the nearest airport is the city's Sharm El Sheikh International Airport. The Sharm El Sheikh metropolitan area is one of the most visited cities in Egypt, with over 3 million visitors in 2024.


== Name ==
The English name of Sharm El Sheikh is a borrowing of the Egyptian Arabic شرم الشيخ, šarm aš-šayḵ and, as such, does not have a fixed romanisation. There are documented uses of alternate spellings such as Sharm el Sheikh and Sharm el-Sheikh, sometimes within the same news article.
Sharm El Sheikh is sometimes referred to as the "City of Peace" (مدينة السلام, madinet es-salām), referring to the large number of international peace conferences that have been held there.
Amongst Egyptians and also many visitors, the name of the city is commonly shortened to "Sharm" (Egyptian Arabic: [ʃɑɾm]), which is its common name in Egyptian Arabic.


== Geography and history ==

Sharm El Sheikh is on a promontory overlooking the Straits of Tiran at the mouth of the Gulf of Aqaba. Its strategic importance led to its transformation from a fishing village into a major port and naval base for the Egyptian Navy. It was conquered by Israel during the Suez Crisis of 1956 and returned to Egypt in 1957. A United Nations peacekeeping force was stationed there until 1967 when it was ordered to leave by Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser, a fact that precipitated the Six-Day War during which it was reoccupied by Israel. Sharm El Sheikh remained under Israeli control from 1967 until the Sinai Peninsula was returned back to Egypt in 1982, after the Egypt–Israel peace treaty of 1979 that was signed in Washington, D.C. During that time, an Israeli settlement named Ofira was built in the area.
In 1968, Israel opened an air force military base there, where Egypt later built the Sharm el-Sheikh International Airport on the same location that included an enormous $420m investment by the Egyptian Holding Company for Airports and Air Navigation, a major project that helped put the city on global map.  Unlike Sinai's other well-known settlement, Yamit, Ofira was not demolished after Israel ceded control of Sinai to Egypt following the Camp David Accords, but was handed over intact and is today a thriving tourist town and home to local Egyptian residents.
Egypt's former president Hosni Mubarak designated Sharm El Sheikh as The City of Peace in 1982 and the Egyptian government began a policy of encouraging massive development of the city. Egyptian businessmen and investors, along with global investors contributed to building several mega projects, including mosques and churches. The city is now an international tourist destination, and environmental zoning laws limit the height of buildings to avoid obscuring the natural beauty of the surroundings. In 2022, Sharm El-Sheikh along with another Egyptian city, Hurghada, were both chosen by Trip advisor as the world's top 25 tourist destinations.
A hierarchical planning approach was adopted for the Gulf of Aqaba, whereby the area's components were evaluated and subdivided into zones, cities and centers. In accordance with this approach, the Gulf of Aqaba zone was subdivided into four cities: Taba, Nuweiba, Dahab and Sharm El Sheikh. Sharm El Sheikh city has been subdivided into five homogeneous centers, namely Nabq, Ras Nusrani, Naama Bay, Umm Sid and Sharm El Maya.
Sharm El Sheikh city, with Naama Bay, Hay el Nour, Hadaba, Rowaysat, Montazah and Shark's Bay form a metropolitan area.
The site off the shore gun emplacements at Ras Nasrani opposite Tiran Island is now a diving area.
In 2005, the resort was hit by the Sharm El Sheikh terrorist attacks, which were carried out by an extremist Islamist organisation targeting Egypt's tourist industry. Eighty-eight people were killed, the majority of them Egyptians, and over 200 were wounded by the attack, making it the second deadliest terrorist attack in the country's history.

The city has played host to a number of important Middle Eastern peace conferences, including the 4 September 1999 agreement to establish Palestinian self-rule over the Gaza Strip. A second summit was held at Sharm on 17 October 2000 following the outbreak of the second Palestinian intifada, but it failed to end the violence. A summit was held in the city on 3 August 2005 on developments in the Arab world, such as the situation in the Arab–Israeli conflict. Again in 2007, an important ministerial meeting took place in Sharm, where dignitaries discussed Iraqi reconstruction.

The World Economic Forum on the Middle East was hosted by Sharm El Sheikh in 2006 and 2008. Amidst the 2011 Egyptian protests, then-president Mubarak reportedly went to Sharm El Sheikh and resigned there on 11 February 2011. The 2014 World Economic Forum in Sharm El Sheikh heralded a new initiative for desert cities urban development in Egypt.  In November 2022, the United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP27) was held in Sharm El Sheikh. This conference led to the first loss and damage fund being created.
On Monday, October 13, 2025, the city hosted an international summit titled "Sharm El-Sheikh Peace Summit" co-chaired by President Abdel Fattah El-Sisi and US President Donald Trump, with the participation of world leaders from more than 20 countries aiming to end the war in the Gaza Strip.


== Climate ==

The city experiences a subtropical arid climate, classified by the Köppen–Geiger system as hot desert (BWh). Temperatures are just short of a tropical climate. Typical temperatures range from 18 to 23 °C (64 to 73 °F) in January and 33 to 37 °C (91 to 99 °F) in August. The temperature of the Red Sea in this region ranges from 21 to 28 °C (70 to 82 °F) over the course of the year.
Marsa Alam, Kosseir and Sharm El Sheikh have the warmest winter night temperatures of cities and resorts in Egypt.
The highest recorded temperature was 46 °C (115 °F) on 3 June 2013, and the lowest recorded temperature was 5 °C (41 °F) on 23 February 2000.


== Economy and tourism ==

Sharm El Sheikh's major industry is foreign and domestic tourism, owing to its landscape, year-round dry climate with long hot summers and warm winters and its long beaches. Its waters are clear and calm for most of the year and have become popular for various water sports, particularly recreational scuba diving and snorkelling. There is scope for scientific tourism due to the diversity of marine life: 250 different coral reefs and 1000 species of fishes.